As-salamu alaykum warahmatullahi
wabarakatuh. And welcome to the fifth
episode of the MH podcast, the Muhammad
Hijab podcast. And I'm joined with a man
who needs no introduction. Um Daniel
Haqiqatju is a person who synthesizes
Islamic knowledge with his studies in
philosophy. He's got a background in
philosophy. He's done a degree in
Harvard University and post-graduate as
well in philosophy. Is that correct?
Yes. Yes, physics and philosophy.
Yeah. And so, what he does quite
effectively is he synthesizes his
secular knowledge and
with classical Islamic knowledge that
he's also acquired through
training.
Uh and to make robust arguments against
people who
are against Islam
and Muslims. And the first thing we need
to probably talk about cuz it's quite
hot now in terms of social media is your
debate with this The Apostate, Rizwan.
Which went quite viral and
you know, was quite a destruction
even by the admission of some of his
fans.
And and this debate really was a
mismatch of
you know, tremendous proportions. First
question is
um what made you want to debate someone
who's
in his own words cuz I did ask him on
Twitter not qualified and trained in any
of the fields that
that he was talking about.
First
of all, thank you for having me on your
podcast. I'm very happy to be speaking
with you, brother. And
as for your question, honestly, I'm not
sure why. I think he made a mistake
in
what he did was he made a video
attacking me and my stance on certain
issues.
And it was unprovoked because I haven't
really spoken anything about him, but he
thought I was an easy target. So, he
made a video mocking me and
all of this.
And at the end of the video, he makes a
kind of offhand remark and he says in a
taunting way if you know, maybe I'll
have this extremist, fundamentalist,
etc. on my program for Q&A. Something
like that. He said something like that.
And this is what I think a mistake
because you usually shouldn't provoke or
challenge someone directly you're not
ready to actually
live up to it.
So, I just as soon as I saw that, I
said, "Okay, fine. You want to have a
Q&A? No problem. Let's let's do it. Just
name the time and place."
I think he wasn't expecting me. I think
in his own mind, his
criticisms of Islam or his
mockery of Islam would kind of make any
Muslim cower and not want to be in the
hot seat against him. So, I think he had
some of this false confidence and that
was his mistake.
I mean, what was really apparent in that
in that discussion
was that he was really and truly well
out
of his league. He was he was dealing
with someone that was
basically his teacher for all intents
and purposes. Someone who who you were
educating him and making making it seem
as if there was some kind of equality in
that kind of interaction.
Um
but it was a humiliating experience
because I saw afterwards he brought some
of the um
kind of excuses that he was making. And
even in the midst of it, he was he was
having an anxiety attack. I mean, he he
couldn't handle even
uh
speaking about it with confidence.
I think it was one of his worst moments
and he's trying his best to do damage
control.
But what what what's your advice on
dealing with people like this? I mean
uh
some people say let's let's employ maybe
a more civilized approach, a more calm
approach. But it seems like you went
straight for the jugular with him. Uh
and and and taught him a lesson straight
away. So, what do you what do you say to
people who um advocate this kind of
compassionate approach to enemies of
Islam like this?
So
I'd like to get your views on that.
Personally, masha Allah. But you know,
my perspective is that practical advice
whenever
confronting atheists, they have this
false sense of security because they
feel that they're always on the attack
critiquing religion and religion has to
be on the defensive and believers have
to be on the defensive to justify
believing God or religious morality and
so forth. But we I think practically
should turn the tables on them. And even
though they might think that they don't
have any beliefs themselves, in reality,
they have many beliefs. They have many
commitments. They might not be religious
per se. You know, they might not believe
in an actual God and they might not have
a theology per se.
But they have many beliefs about what is
right and wrong. They have a belief
about the history of the world. They
have a belief about
materialism and the structure of the
universe. All of these can be very
explicitly attacked. And I know that you
also use this method in in your own
debates to put them on the defensive so
that they have to justify instead of
presenting themselves as the judge,
jury, and executioner sitting there and
evaluating other beliefs like Islam or
what have you. No, they need to do
they need to show how why are they so
much more rational
supposedly than everyone else. And with
a little bit of probing and asking some
pointed questions, then it's over. It's
pretty much over because they haven't
because of the false sense of security,
they haven't actually thought through
some of their own beliefs. They've only
adopted them because that's the status
quo around them. They have the advantage
of playing on the home field because
they're surrounded by a world that
some of you know, liberalism for
example, secularism. This is in the air.
This is in the water. This is what
people breathe and is common sense to
people. So, this is a home field
advantage that they are operating under
and they're using that to attack others
in a sense of false security. So, we
just turn the tables on that. We show
them that actually these assumptions
that you believe are so rational, they
are nothing there's nothing rational
about them at all.
Well, yeah. I think that's a brilliant
that's a brilliant way of dealing with
them. And
the way you dealt with the squirming
apostate as we we might want want to
was maybe a good demonstrative way to
see how that's all done in practice.
But talking about controversy, I think
one of the main things now that has been
attached to your name um
uh doing a bit of research yesterday
after you sent me some articles and
stuff, done some reading
is about some of the controversial
opinions that you've had especially with
Yaqeen Institute and your responses to
them.
Um so, maybe to put this in a blunt way,
what's the beef? What's going on? What's
the what's the issue that you guys have?
Are you a disgruntled
employee as
some have said?
Yeah, this is something that
Yaqeen itself seems to be spreading, but
um
the issue is not with Yaqeen Institute.
Um
you know, I was their director of
research when they first began.
And you know, for various reasons me
not believing in the direction that the
organization was going
because of some of these issues that I
criticize now publicly
um you know, there was a split
in approach. And it's not a problem with
Yaqeen Institute. There are many
unfortunately
of these types of organizations and
even du'at or imams that preach a kind
of apologetic apologetic in a negative
way approach to addressing
some of these issues like jihad
like evolution,
the conflict between Islam and
evolution,
the conflict between Islam and feminism
and this kind of modern women's rights.
And what I find from not just me, but
many have noted this that what you see
from these institutes and from these
figures is that they claim we have to
sugarcoat, we have to water down. I
mean, they don't use that those words,
but that's essentially the message. We
have to on the subject
that is very clear
in Islam
we have to minimize this or we have to
say that no, this is not really
applicable or this is not really
relevant for our time or there was they
were never applied.
All these kinds of apologetic means to
minimize and sugarcoat and water down.
And this has a very negative impact on
the faith of Muslims today who are
looking to these institutes and these
religious authorities
for guidance on how do we think, how do
we feel about what we find in our deen
that contradicts the status quo, this
liberal secular feminist materialist
status quo.
My approach, and I believe this is your
approach as well, is we want to
challenge that status quo.
We want to say that no, Islam is haq.
Islam is clear. The truth is clear from
falsehood. And yes, Islam is true. We
have no qualms, no hesitation in stat-
stating it
in no uncertain terms. And we're not
going to compromise. we're not going to
water down. In fact, we are going to
engage in debate. We're going to engage
in conversation, intellectual, academic,
and we're going to show and and bring
evidence
how Islam is superior, is the truth, is
bringing guidance on these matters of
life and governance and everything.
So, this is the approach that I
very strongly believe in and I know that
yourself and many other dua
believe in this method. But, you have
others who are countering this with a
watered-down kind of no, we have to
accommodate. Let's try to make Islam fit
into this liberal secular box so that we
can live comfortably and we can fight
Islamophobia, quote unquote. So, let me
tell you how how I see it. Like in terms
of Yaseen,
um some of the research material is very
good. I don't I don't see it like I
think you were right to say that they're
not all the same. Uh
this is not all the same, right? It's
some research material there is very
good. I don't have any
got a problem myself with with the
organization. I think they're fine.
They're doing good job. However, I do
share some of the concerns that you have
with some of the research papers,
especially two things which I saw your
response to,
uh which I think were were were were
worth outlining and worth responding to
and worth refuting even.
Namely, the the confusion on LGBT,
uh
the the the confusion on
when we say LGBT here, we're talking not
just about the sexual act of a man
having sex with another man. We're
talking about all of the other issues
like same-sex marriage and advocating
that or you know, the the ratio approach
of Jonathan Brown, which I think you've
you've written something on and also
Shaykh Muslim on on the actual
Yaseen website itself has a response to.
Um and the second thing which I found
was most problematic as well, um was the
evolution article
of allegorizing who Adam was,
almost mytho-
creating some kind of eschatology of
him,
mythological approach that a lot of the
Christians are forced
to do. So, these two things stuck out to
me as
points of concern, like real concern,
because
uh there's no salaf for that. There's no
precedent for those things that have
been said in in in those articles at
all. So, I
In terms of refuting those particular
two articles, I'm I'm I'm aware of
obviously all the articles that they've
written, but those particular two I
think they're obviously prioritized.
Um so, let's talk about those two first.
Um let's talk about those two articles
first, the LGBT article and the and the
evolution article. And
why do you think that this approach is
now being allowed
and
you know, in a mainstream traditionalist
organization like Yaseen? And
how can we
influence the organization to try and
limit that kind of discourse, which is
clearly almost I would say outside of
the paradigm, obviously?
Well, I tried to influence them
from the inside and clearly that didn't
have any effect.
Um you know, I knew many of the people
working there um at the high level of
the organization.
And I know what their mentality is and I
know what they've said and what they
actually think about these issues.
On the actual public material that they
have, I think it's absolutely
unacceptable
to preach this idea as religiously
acceptable. That Muslims, their claim
is, and this is in in the article of
Jonathan Brown, that Muslims should
support many LGBT rights,
including same-sex marriage, including
what they are? Does it mention what they
are? Does it Yes, yes. He mentions in
the article He mentions same-sex
marriage explicitly. He mentions, for
example, transgender bathrooms
uh and trans- those kinds of transgender
issues. So, it's not all When we say
LGBT, it's not just homosexual behavior
or homosexual rights, lesbian, bisexual,
also transgender.
This is all included in in their
statement, Muslims must support or
should support many LGBT rights. So, and
who is Jonathan Brown to make this kind
of claim? Is he a mufti? Is he a kind of
religious scholar? Does he claim that
for himself? Then why is Yaseen, if they
are traditional
as they might want to claim, orthodox,
then how how do they give a platform to
such a article and to such a claim to be
made
and then promote it through videos and
infographics and so forth? This is
something very shocking and I think
Muslims the Muslim community has in in
the US and maybe even overseas have this
idea that well, LGBT is just this other
issue. It's not going to affect us. So,
let's just put our head down and ignore.
We don't have to condemn, we don't have
to say anything about this kind of
political wheeling and dealing that's
going on with LGBT and we'll be fine.
But, this is a wrong mentality for many
reasons.
He had this parable of if you're in a
boat and there's one person rowing
and the other person's you know, you
have you have to I can't remember
exactly the terminology he used, but
it's basically an argument from darura.
It's an argument from necessity almost.
It seems like this is an argument from
necessity.
Uh which for me doesn't make I mean, for
me looking at that, it made no sense to
me. An argument from darura uh or
necessity
or even maslaha, which would be even
less than darura. Um all of these things
and and even reference to like the
dhimmi state which was made, which is
completely different. It's qiyas
ma'al-fariq. You know, it's a false
analogy because
I mean, the idea that a dhimmi state
would allow certain minorities to
practice certain things, which was not
like for example,
drinking alcohol and all these things
were allowed in non-Muslim spaces within
a Muslim land. That's a dhimmi
allowance, right? For in a Muslim land.
These things are there. But, it's qiyas
ma'al-fariq now to say that so an
aqalliya, a a minority group in in for
example, the West have to not only
acquiesce to the issue or to allow the
issue, but now to
to to to to to argue for the issue. Now,
I have to actually go and say gay
marriage, I have to go and say gay
marriage is should be done. I mean, that
seems to me such an aberration from the
Quranic message that is is beggars
belief that this could be said. And I
was actually quite shocked because I
respect Jonathan Brown. You know, I I
read I read a lot of his articles, I
read a lot of his stuff and wallahi,
he's he's got great work for the ummah.
And I'd love to have him on the show and
I'd love to speak to him about this this
matter.
But, this is such an aberration from
that which is You cannot find salaf for
this.
I'm not talking about dhimmi And that
Yeah, not only that
about Muslims allowing dhimmis to
practice certain things cuz that's qiyas
ma'al-fariq. We're talking about an
aqalliya, a minority Muslims arguing for
the fahish rights of the non-Muslim
majority
and doing so like
this is basically the opposite of what
Lut did. It's the opposite.
Was he not a minority?
Exactly, he was a minority. Yeah, it's
the opposite of Lut. Yeah.
But, even even the analogy
Even the analogy with ahl al-dhimma, if
we look at Ibn al-Qayyim, his ahkam ahl
al-dhimma, he is specifically addressing
this issue because uh within that work,
Ibn al-Qayyim rahimahullah is talking
about how uh we might allow,
for example, incest marriage, mother-son
marriage. Was Zoroastrians, Majus?
Zoroastrians, Majus.
Yeah. Uh that might be permitted, but he
makes a distinction. He says, yet we
would not allow, even if it is halal in
their deen,
uh we would not allow same-sex uh
liwat basically. Man-on-man uh
penetrative acts. He said, we would not
allow that. Why? He makes a distinction
because incest is something that is
rejected. People naturally, they are
rejecting this, but the shahwa that
comes with the behavior of qawm Lut,
that has a danger of spreading. So, it
could spread to the Muslims.
It could spread and corrupt Muslims. So,
that's why even if it's halal according
to the or permissible according to the
deen of this minority, uh the dhimmis,
the Muslim authority still still would
not endorse that or allow that or in any
way promote it. I mean, if he if he had
made the argument from Muslim if there
was a Muslim majority and the dhimmis, I
can see him making a more robust robust
argument. He could he could do istishab
somewhere. I haven't done istiqra. I
don't know exactly what all the ulama
said.
But, that's a different What I'm What
I'm trying to propose is that that's a
completely different case because we're
talking about a minority who are not who
are not the lawmakers, who are not in
power. They are
the aqalliya, they are the minority and
they are actively, according to this
view, should be
promoting gay rights in order to ally
with the left wing. I agree with you. If
this is the only option, yeah. This is
which is a false analogy like you know,
the idea of that he's one person's
rowing the boat and I can't remember
exactly
the language he used, but it's
it made it seem as if this is darura,
it's almost life or death. Your life
basically is on the line.
You hear many of these kind of pro-LGBT
figures, they will appeal to darura and
they'll say that this is if we do not
accept LGBT, we'll literally be rounded
up and put into concentration camps.
They appeal to this type of emotionalism
and fear tactics. Where is the evidence
for this? Where
How are you determining that this is
actually the case or are you just
fearmongering? Because on that basis,
you can fearmonger for If if it's true
that, for example, we're going to be
rounded up, what about the issue of
Zionism, for example? Should Muslims
start supporting Israel because we're
worried that because of the influence of
Zionism and the Israeli lobby, so forth,
going to be rounded up because of our
stance on Palestine?
On any issue, you can appeal to this
kind of darurah if you have the specter
of oh, this imminent genocide, this
imminent concentration camp. You can
justify anything. So, you have to be
very careful and circumspect when you
make such claims and not just, you know,
make these kinds of sloppy analogies
with people in boats, as you mentioned
in in this Yaqeen article. Yeah.
Um I wanted to also ask you about the
evolution article. I mean, you've
written some evolution articles, which I
think were subsequently removed from the
the website. Uh and unfortunately,
um what's been put in its place or
I'm not sure if it was already there.
Was uh this article which argued for the
fact that Adam alayhis salaam
from from what I'm not mistaken, is is
is an allegory. Is is
is not actually a historical figure. Is
Is that the extent of the claim?
Yeah, I mean, there are some details,
but this article on Yaqeen site is
saying that there's no um
problem with Muslims accepting evolution
in whole
uh and including the evolution of human
beings. And to reconcile this, as
Muslims, we have to recognize that Adam
alayhis salaam is mythology. This is
akin to mythology, and there's nothing
wrong with myths. These are things that
we can accept as myth, and that's how we
uh accept Darwinian evolution of human
beings while still being, quote unquote,
orthodox Muslims. This is the argument
that the paper makes, and I'm shocked
that a institute can claim to be
traditional and orthodox and host such a
paper on their website.
I would agree that that that that's
that's taking it to like we don't have
anything like that in our literature. If
you If you look at the Christian
literature, I think you can make that
argument because they have the
Alexandrian school. We have the origin
of Alexandria. You have this They can
They can They can mythologize They can
mythologize
all these things and say this is a myth
myth and this and that. They will have
their own problem if they do that.
They'll Then the question is to what
extent? I mean, this is a big problem.
If you say that Adam is a myth, then
what's
stop us from saying that Musa alayhis
salaam was a myth and that Isa alayhis
salaam was a myth and even that Muhammad
alayhis salaam was a myth. I mean, we
can wait, right? Um so, it's it's when
you have a hermeneutical principle which
is facet, which is totally
uh corrupt and has no essence has no
salaf, has no precedence, then you can
start doing things with it
which are going to break down the
religion of Islam.
So, this is I would even go as far as to
say this is kufr kufri. This is a
disbelieving
uh pole a statement. I'm not saying that
yani we're going to make takfir of the
person who's written it. I'm I'm not
advocating that cuz that's all kinds of
athar, all kinds of
But it it is kind of I have to be
honest,
uh
surprising to see that this is on uh
the same website, same forum where you
have
great articles being written by people
that I I think we both respect, we both
love and respect. Uh that including Omar
Suleiman, and people like, you know,
Jonathan Brown. I I do love and respect
them. I I have good opinion of them. I
don't I don't disrespect them. However,
when you see them making these
In case of Brown, making the sexual
sexual claim and then this other
of LGBT pushing the rights of LGBT
marriage or whatever it was that he
said. And then you have this claim now
with the evolution. Just kind of to be
honest with you, it weakens the
position. And you could even argue cuz I
knew that really and truly this is what
creates radicalism. Because if people go
to um
Yaqeen
and see these these kind of uh
uh diluted opinions,
they will know that the paradigm or the
language or the
the the the rhetoric that's been used is
outside of the scope of Islam. And so,
they will want to seek something more
Islamic, and many times that will come
in the case of some cult group or some
radical group or something like that.
And then so, it really does not do
Muslims any favor when you have people
who are operating outside of the the
paradigm as if they're working within
the paradigm.
Yeah, of course, I agree with you. And I
mean, we're just talking about these two
articles, but they have many that are
problematic, and I wrote um myself and
some other scholars and students of
knowledge uh collaborated to review
about, you know, over a dozen of their
articles um and provide peer review peer
review and critique, which any academic
institution or any academic person
should welcome and invite.
And we evaluate uh these dozen or so
articles. It's on muslimskeptic.com,
which is my website, um and it's a
Yaqeen review.
And we found some very shocking things.
Like, this is not even the most
shocking, in my opinion. Evolution is
not the most shocking. The LGBT is not
the most shocking. There's things that
were even more shocking that we uh
discovered in this in this kind of
review. Uh
what the other big problem that uh we
raised with Yaqeen is that they are
involved with counterextremism
uh officials, and they have a board
members who have worked with and were
actually architects of uh CVE,
countering violent extremism, which
which was the Obama administration
um program to control the Muslim
narrative and to basically police
Muslims and make sure that Muslims
aren't thinking in the wrong ways. So,
the analog or the descendant of CVE in
the UK is Prevent.
And one of their board members was one
of the architects of CVE.
And their director of research
operations
is a former counterextremism specialist
who worked with the US Army in Syria and
in the Middle East. So, they have people
like this who are influencing and
directing their research. This should
raise many red flags for the community
that you have a organization claiming to
be authoritatively Islamic and orthodox,
traditional. And yet they have such
people who can influence their output,
can influence what they are presenting
to the community.
So, these are the kinds of
Everything is based on not my personal
private experience I had in the
organization. All of the review that we
have is evidenced by public material.
We're not spying on them. We're just
looking at public material that they
have put out.
And and they are advertising as an
organization. We just put a spotlight on
it, and we ask questions. That's the
only I think that's legitimate. What's
wrong with asking questions?
Okay, now I So far we agree, but let me
just give you some Let's play devil's
advocate for a bit because otherwise
it's going to be just me and you
agreeing for an hour and a half.
Um let's let's talk about Let's talk
about
Shaytan's advocate.
Um what I was going to say is that Okay,
so far these concerns, I think,
especially in Britain, I think
I have a reason to believe, though I'm
not sociologically certain about that.
The if you want to call it this this
way, the Islamic community is more
conservative, so-called conservative, in
Britain than it is in the US. I mean,
I've I've been to both countries. I've
been to different parts of the US, and
compared to
the US and
North America, seems like the UK has
uh
more of a strong and solid stance on
some of the key issues, especially on um
on the stuff that we've been talking
about. Um but having said this, I mean,
some would say that some of your
attitudes towards people like Jonathan
Brown and people like Omar Suleiman,
that actually has become personal now
between you and them.
Uh to the extent whereby you say things
like, you know, Jonathan Brown is a
liberal Muslim.
Now, I'll be honest. I think I When I
read that When I heard you say that
in one of the videos that you put out
in preparation for this podcast, I was
thinking to myself, when I when I think
about liberal Muslims, I think of people
like An-Na'im or people like um
uh Amina Wadud. People that
on almost all matters explicitly operate
outside of the paradigm. Yani, they
justify it from them to themselves to
operate outside of the Islamic paradigm.
I thought that was a bit harsh to put
Jonathan Brown in that category. I I
don't think he does operate without the
paradigm. I think this LGBT
Did I specifically say Did I
specifically say he's a liberal Muslim?
I I think you did, yes. I'm not I'm not
sure. What do you What do you consider
him as? Do you think he's a liberal
Muslim?
I don't think we have to put these
labels unnecessarily. I I agree with
you. Like, we don't need to uh say that
this person is X or Y.
Okay. Uh we just need to look at what
they have said. What they have said and
what they have written, and do they
stand by what they have said and what
they have written?
And if they do, then people can come to
their own conclusions. I think that the
Amina Wadud No Muslim, alhamdulillah, or
very few, especially in the UK, are
going to be affected by someone who is
clearly, you know, making these kinds of
deviant statements, kufr statements,
calling Islam deadbeat dad and all this
garbage. I was saying that conscientious
gap and you know,
when 4:34 Isha had a conscientious gap
and almost as if she's rejecting
the the
Yeah, of course. She says no. In her
book, she says, "We have to say no to
the Quran." Wherever In that case, the
question is is she Muslim or not really?
That's that's the real question.
But But she's not influencing uh the
community because she's seen as clearly
outside of it. Yes. But is more
problematic uh in my opinion when you
have those individuals who are seen as
Orthodox. They wear the cloak of
Orthodoxy and traditionalism, yet they
preach a message that is very heterodox.
When you have an article from Jonathan
Brown, we mentioned that Muslims should
support LGBT rights.
The article that says that a
non-believer, mushrik, who has been
reached by Islam, they know about the
message of Islam, and they reject it.
And they reject it knowingly. This
person Allah can the mushrik can
forgive. Allah may forgive this person.
Writing an article like this on Yaqeen
and publishing it I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I
No. No. Even if it is reached uh fully
the message of Islam, and he rejects it,
then it is within Allah's mercy to
forgive this person. And I mean this is
clearly contrary to what is
in the Quran.
I would love to have Jonathan Brown and
actually bring him on the show and ask
him about that benefit of whatever, you
know. Maybe he does have real for this.
I mean the thing about ratio, I read it.
Like so I know exactly
what he said on that. So I on this one
here, I haven't read exactly. So you
could you could send it to me and I
could try and get in contact with him.
But cuz he's not here to represent
himself, I don't want to, you know, um
That's fine. I'm Maybe you can go and
look and read the quotes in that review.
You can see what they had published and
judge for yourself. So don't take my
word for it. Actually look at what they
have written. Do you Do you Do you
like here's a question. So you have all
these criticisms of people like Omar
Suleiman and then
uh I think this guy called Justin
Parrott as well who's who's also written
I've not read too many of his articles,
but I think I've read a few of them. Um
and um
Omar Suleiman and Jonathan Brown. I
think these are the three main ones that
you you kind of covered their stuff on
your
your your article. My question is um
do you label them after that? So do you
say okay that they they have now do you
straight forward question do you
consider them
for example do you consider them
deviants?
I don't feel the need to go to that
extent. And I'm not in a position
I don't consider myself as a scholar.
I'm just a student of knowledge. I don't
consider myself in a the position of
authority to make those kinds of
declarations. Okay. like want to do is
and and it's not just me by the way cuz
this article was written by me and other
scholars. And we cite other criticisms,
other
actual scholars who have
critiqued Yaqeen. So for example this
Jonathan Brown article about the
forgiveness of mushrikin, we cited
articles from Sheikh
Matin Khan for example of the US,
Ustad Mobeen Vaid of the US who also
critiqued his article and and condemned
the article along the same lines.
So it's not just me
as a disgruntled ex-employee of Yaqeen,
many others are waking up. The problem
is that their articles are very long, so
many people don't actually read them
in depth. And you yourself said you
hadn't read them before. You you kind of
just read them in preparation for this
podcast. But
it's shocking some of the things that
you'll you'll find. But we don't need to
go to the extent. I think if we go to
the extent of just throwing labels
uh then
we want we want
right? We want them to admit that you
have made a serious mistake here.
And not only correct it, but own up to
it. Say we did make a mistake. This was
a problem. Because if they just go back
and they scrub all of their articles,
then what about all of the people over
the years because this institute has
been around for 4 years now who read
these articles and their understanding
of Islam was corrupted because of what
they read. So Yaqeen has a duty to not
only scrub the errors, correct the
errors, but also correct the
doubts and the problems, the wrong
understanding that they created in the
community through these articles.
I'll be honest. When I was looking at
your kind of reputational
article like it was
uh an article that was uh dealing with
all the kind of
you compartmentalized it into okay
women's rights, you know, evolution,
whatever it was. I I can't remember the
exact categories.
When I was looking through it, I I had
to say some of it I thought you could
have done better than that. Like some of
it yeah, I agreed with you totally. Like
for example the ratio thing, totally in
agreement.
The
evolution thing, totally in agreement.
But there were some things I was
thinking okay, this is not as they're
not on the same level, right? So
Do you not think it would be more
effective if we just focus on the top
three two or three main problems that
they have? And for probably the ratio
thing is one of them, right? And the
evolution thing for me is another one.
Maybe the counter extremism thing that
you just mentioned is a third one.
But instead of having like 20 things
that you're criticizing that maybe hone
in on three or two or three things which
are the priorities for you because
when you when you talk about other
things like for example the
criticism you had on the doubt study
that was done. I mean
you could argue it's immaterial either
way. It's inconsequential whether you're
whether there was bias there or not
there or they had an agenda there. This
is a sociological thing. Sometimes when
you mix something like as important as
uh
halal haram kufur and iman with
something like that kind of maybe
weakens the case a little bit. So do you
think that maybe cuz nowadays people
find it very difficult to read. I mean
let's be honest. People find it very
difficult to read
maybe 5 or 7 or 10,000 words. I'm not
sure how many words that would have
been.
So to to to abbreviate it and to just
focus on the main
contentions that almost everyone would
agree with. The ratio thing, the
evolution thing, maybe the counter
extremism thing. And then a slow and
gentle pressure, you know, on on Yaqeen
Institute to to rethink their position
on those things. Um what do you think of
that as a strategy?
Well, two things I'll say. One, we
wanted to be a comprehensive review as
much as we could manage with our limited
time and resources. We want to be
comprehensive so that it wouldn't be
said that oh, you're cherry-picking and
you're not fully appreciating
this work that we're doing. You're only
focusing on one or two articles. And
you're missing the forest for the trees.
So we want to avoid that accusation by
being comprehensive. Second of all, I
would say that yes, it is a long review.
This
you know, when you're comprehensive, it
will require a lot of words. It will
require a lot of work and research to
put everything in front of the reader.
But our audience is
mainly the
scholars and the academics and the
students of knowledge who are used to
reading more.
They will appreciate the depth of
analysis and research inshallah that
they can be aware. Okay? They can be
aware because those are the people,
those imams,
they're the ones who are going to refer
to Yaqeen's work
to their peers, to their communities. So
we want to make sure that those that
class
of intellectual within the Muslim
community is aware and has a full
picture. The third point is that I don't
actually agree with you on this that
it's just a matter of one or two
articles that are major and then
everything else we can do better. I
think that there are many articles that
have serious problems and it represents
an entire ideology that Yaqeen
represents and abides by, lives by. Does
their work by their vision for how to
address these issues which we talked
about a few minutes ago. Their entire
vision is what is the problem. That is
and these articles are the symptom of
the bigger problem. So to to argue that
and to substantiate that, you have to
present this this larger
analysis and a comprehensive review. So
that's why it it's we took the route
that we did acknowledging that some
people won't have time to read
everything, but we made it as simple as
possible with links and with
you know, a table of contents and so
forth so that people can okay, I want to
read what Yaqeen has to say about
women's rights
and how they say that certain aspects of
the Sharia are myths or certain aspects
of what scholars have said are erroneous
for example. The study that we brought
up that you mentioned
their study is saying that the biggest
challenge Okay, look at this. The
biggest challenge facing Muslims in
terms of their iman, what's affecting
their iman in this day and age
is what?
Religious Muslims.
Religious Muslims, quote unquote, are
causing the is the biggest source of
doubt
for the Muslim community.
This is shocking.
This is shocking. This is essentially
saying oh, the bearded Muslim, the
bearded hijab or niqabi Muslim is
causing doubts. We have to So if that's
the
you've identified the source, then all
of your material is going to be against
fighting those religious Muslims as
opposed to what do you think is the
biggest source of doubt? To be To be
honest, I I done a few surveys myself.
I'll actually read them out for you if
you like, you know.
These surveys I done on them
on my YouTube channel
on the community page.
And
in these
questions I asked, like I asked them
different questions.
It came I'll be honest, it came with
very similar results. So for example
I said which group of iman are the
biggest threat to which group of people
are the biggest threat to your email. I
had other questions in the past. From
the following, right? So, I put
fringe Muslims, for example, you know,
as pubs,
ISIS,
extreme Shiites, or extreme Sufis, for
example. I'm just giving example
example. Or new atheists, second
category, like Dawkins, Harris, etc.
Apostates,
e.g. apostate Ridvan. Let's see how much
accrues.
Uh Christian apologists like David Wood,
etc. Or none of the above. So, this got
16,000 votes, okay? And uh
which is quite good. I mean, it's it's
quite good in terms of a sample, and
it's anonymous.
So,
in terms of the biggest people number of
people,
fringe Muslims, i.e. the Madakhilah as
pubs and the Takfiris, the ISIS, and and
the extremists from different Shiite
groups and different Sufi groups, they
were 30%.
The new atheists were 11%. The
apostates, like Ridvan, only 6%.
Unfortunately.
Um David Wood, surprisingly, Christian
apologists, 5%.
Um
which is quite surprising because I
thought David Wood and those would score
a bit bit higher than the apostates.
None of the above, 50%. So, in terms of
yani the the group of people that are
causing most doubts. I mean, I think you
could make an argument that for
irreligious people,
um
the people who are creating the most
doubt for Muslims are actually some
religious
uh people. I mean, but not just But you
called them fringe. You're calling them
fringe. They're calling them religious.
Okay? They're calling them religious
people.
remember that reading that that
particular article, to be fair, and I I
I remember actually referencing it as
well in one of my other cuz I think it's
only one of the only doubt studies. I'm
not sure if you know any other ones that
was done on Muslims.
Like studies on Muslim doubts with the
cross section of
community in the in the West.
And to be fair to Yusuf, I forget his
surname, whoever
conducted
this this study.
Um
he he says that he he defines religious
Muslims. See, they say that Muslims who
have one only one particular
understanding of Islam.
So,
Do you have multiple
Do you have multiple understandings of
Islam?
religious dogmatism. So, someone who who
who thinks that, for example, What does
that mean?
My Are you dogmatic? Am I a dogmatic?
No, no, no. Within Islam. So, we would
say like in conformity to for example,
like if a Hanafi's praying a certain way
or you know, a Shafi'i's praying a
certain way. Unless we want to impose
that there's only one opinion on these
matters, right? Uh
it's difficult to to So, this is this is
your gloss of it, right? But this is not
in his definition. And it's How do we
know what the people who are taking the
survey, what they have in their mind
when they read religious Muslim?
Do they have this kind of nuanced
understanding that yourself have as a as
a student of knowledge or someone who is
well versed in these issues? Or do they
have the idea that the religious Muslim
is the bearded, the one who is going to
say that no, in Islam,
let's say ikhtilat or taking off the
hijab is wrong. Okay? No, this is
dogmatic. You're dogmatic. You're
insisting on not drinking, and you're
insisting on not having a homosexual
best friend. You're being dogmatic.
You're being this and that. So, we have
to understand like what kind of people
is that I think these are legitimate
interrogations here.
That the end user or the the participant
might not know exactly cuz it's not very
strictly defined. What do we mean by
religious or dogmatic Muslims? There's
still scope There's a big scope of
interpretation there. Obviously, that's
going to be a methodological kind of
barrier to any kind of um survey that
you're going to do. And then that's fair
enough, but I think to go one step
further and say it's it's an
agenda-based thing.
I mean, you
Could we not say this husband and wife
there maybe?
I mean, you did make a compelling case
that they had certain questions, and
then they changed those questions
afterwards when I was reading the
article. They had certain questions, and
they changed it. But
um what I fear is that there's
contrivance here. And now you also
You've got your own agenda. Okay, I get
Do you see the point? Against Yaseen,
and you're trying to force the narrative
that they are, you know, the the the
antagonist that we must repel. Rather
than Okay, this is an organization,
which I think is more of a nuanced
approach. It's an organization which has
different kind of writers, different
kind of um
academics that are writing on different
issues. Many of them are operating fully
within the paradigm, you know, not
saying anything wrong. Some of them are
saying things which are
wrong, but which can be corrected. And
other things are are being said which is
kufr and dalal, which is the like the
ratio the ratio and the evolution and so
on and so forth.
Uh and it's that third category
Yeah, this is how I would put it. It's
that third category that we need to kind
of really focus on. And the other two
categories, I think we can have a more
calm approach to.
What do you What do you think of this?
Yeah, I think that, you know, I
in the article and the review, we make
the case for why this is a more
comprehensive issue.
And, you know, people can judge. They
can read it, and they can judge for
themselves. It's a lot to read, but
inshallah in the future we'll have more
bite-sized points.
But like I said at the beginning, this
is not an issue of one organization.
This is a more systematic problem that
is affecting dawah in the West, and now
it's even creeping into the East. So, I
mean, I think that
we have to recognize what is going on.
And I mean, the way that you describe it
is like oh, you have this organization
that they have good articles, and then
they have also kufr and dalal.
It's very casual way to put it.
I think it's very
Yeah, but the question that we have to
ask ourselves is why? Like how can you
trust someone or an organization that
has hosted this kufr in the
on their site for years.
How can you trust like
I think there should be a stronger
vetting process, especially on And also,
by the way, you yourself, masha Allah,
recognize and can make these
distinctions of this is
kufr, this is dalal, this is this and
that and that. But the average reader
who is They're looking to Yaseen to
learn about the deen. So, their
standards
That's my concern. I agree. Because I
went to North America, I'll be honest
with you, there were some young people
and in Canada as well, which I've
visited I don't know how many times in
the last x amount of years. But the the
problem I find is with the youth. When
the young people come to me and they
say, "Well, what what is our stance on
on these on gay marriages?" I mean, I
mean,
should we really be having a discussion
on that? I mean,
isn't that isn't that one of the most
qatai things in the religion? It's like
saying to a Muslim, "What is your stance
on
one God? Do you do you believe in one
for sure?" What's your What's our stance
on the prophethood or of Prophet
Muhammad that he's the final prophet?
You know, it's something like that. It's
It really made me think. That
conversation I was having in North
America is very unlikely to have been
had in Britain, if that makes sense.
I I and I do fear that
the the religion is going to start start
being
It's going to dilute it. It's going to
become um It's going to go in the
direction of progressive Islam. It's
going to be capitulatory. It's going to
look weak. It's That's what it looks
like. And it looks weak. And then it
opens the doors for outsiders,
non-Muslims, to say, "You're doing
taqiyya. You're doing not taqiyya.
You're doing taqiyya, actually. You're
doing You're speaking in fork tongue.
You're You're not That is my real
concern with it." But I do think that
these
people, these mashayikh and these
students of knowledge and these
academics that are on Yaseen,
I do think they're on our side in the
sense that they're trying to do the same
work as we are. Yeah, I do believe that
they're trying to do the same work. And
like, for example, Jonathan Brown's book
on slavery is very good. I think it was
His work on slavery is very good. And
his even his his article on apostasy, I
didn't see anything aberrational kufr
there at all. I thought he was engaging
with the literature. He mentioned
Salafi. He mentioned this person. He
mentioned that. It's clearly that he's
operating within the within the
paradigm. You could argue whether he was
saying was accurate or not or whether it
was the correct opinion or not. But all
of that I think is still happening
within the paradigm. And
Like, for example, your approach with
with apostate
apostate the apostate. Um when he was he
was asking you about the hudud, and you
gave him straightforward answers, like
cutthroat answers.
Um Jonathan Brown's on the other side of
the
the spectrum. So, he'll give you an
answer which is
maybe
maybe it's it's possibly taqiyya, like
giving you what you want to hear.
Uh
and and actually not being
in fully in in line with the spirit. So,
there's two sides of the
the
the spectrum.
But isn't there somewhere in the middle
where we can say we can give an answer
which is a little bit more nuanced than
the answer you give, like this
cutthroat? For example, on the issue of
homosexual punishment.
Like when he asked you, "What's the
punishment of
homosexual sex in Islam?" I mean, we
know there's khilaf among the four
schools. There is khilaf. Abu Hanifa
says the Hanafi school says that there's
no punishment at all. That's That's the
That's the official position in No, no.
There is a punishment.
Oh, yeah, sorry. There's no death
penalty, right?
As far as I know of of the Hanafi
school, there's no death penalty. But
that's irrelevant. You see, that
ikhtilat there
Like those nuances, if we are studying
the tradition, we're studying our deen,
um
we take note of this ikhtilat. But does
that ikhtilat actually functionally make
a difference to the murtad or to the
non-Muslim audience or some of these
Muslim youth who are confused? They
find it very problematic to punish this
behavior. If love is love, it's just two
people consensually agreeing, why should
they even be
why should that even be seen as immoral?
They don't They're not even agreeing on
the fact that it's immoral, let alone
that it's criminalized, let alone that
it's being punished.
I agree I agree with that sentiment.
It's clearly
homosexual sex penetrative sex is
is is the most one of the most clearly
immoral things or aberrational or haram
things in in the Quran. Forget about the
Hadith.
It's very clear.
But now the question of the punishment.
I mean, the punishments are Hudud. Some
of them
have nuance discussion on them. And and
the issue is what I when I speak to for
example
people, I wouldn't want to put my neck
on the chopping board if you like and
say, "Okay, well, this is the because in
1,400 years, to be honest, let's be
honest. Like, you know, the the Hanafi
school of thought has a completely
different opinion on homosexual
punishment, for example. The The
question of I wrote a small treatise on
Ridda. It's a small book that I wrote.
It was actually a dissertation. I'm not
sure if you've come across it or
anything like that.
Um
and what I found when I was doing my
research on it like
uh there are more nuances. It's not just
okay that the the punishment of the
apostate is death. I wouldn't put it
that way. Like, the reason why I
wouldn't put it that way is because
the Prophet Muhammad in in in
when he was asked
to
when he was asked about the
uh Suhayl ibn Amr uh Suhayl ibn Amr,
sorry. When when he was doing a
mufawadat with him or
discussions with him and he stipulated
in in in this
that uh
if you have an apostate,
bring them back.
Bring them back to our lands. So, in
other words, they're not they're not
killed. Yeah?
Um that now I was reading Ibn Qayyim
al-Jawziyyah in his Zad al-Ma'ad. As far
as I'm aware, this is where he wrote it.
I can give you the reference if you
like.
And it's Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, he
says this is ghayr mansukh.
First of all, it's not abrogated. Which
means it's within the state right if it
sees it within the maslaha of that state
to not have a capital punishment for
apostasy.
Wait, does he say that or is this is
your
Yeah, yeah, it's not Ibn Qayyim's
No, Ibn Qayyim said that.
He said that because he because
of the fact that
this
this agreement was done with the with
the Prophet Muhammad in in Hudaybiyyah
he he did he did this agreement with the
with the disbelievers and it was a
condition that any murtad goes to them.
He said there's only one exception that
you can't bring back a Muslim woman to
them.
He gave only one exception based on the
verse of Surat al-Mumtahanah. But I can
send you the maqala. But the point is is
that is it out of the scope of Islam? Is
it against the the Hadith? Is it against
the tradition to say that in a Muslim
state so long as there is a contractual
agreement between a Muslim country and a
non-Muslim country to do so?
That uh the murtads or the apostates are
then
strategically relocated to
uh
a non-Muslim land based on agreement.
So, Ibn Qayyim would say, "No, it's this
is permissible." Based on the research I
I spoke to some like proper ulama on
this and they agreed with that. So, the
point is since that is there in the
tradition, right? I would I would fear
to do
is to remove that nuance from the
discussion. Because if I remove that
nuance from the discussion
sometimes when I speak to Muslims who
have doubts, they that nuance can make
the difference between them staying and
leaving their religion.
Do you know what I mean? If if they knew
about that nuance, they could say,
"Well, actually, it's not a
one-size-fits-all policy, etc." So, that
they they can see that there's there's a
degree of malleability in the Islamic
tradition.
Not only with the the homosexual
punishment, as we said, there is khilaf.
And you mentioned the lesbian thing,
which there is You're aware there's no
there's no pun there's no hadd. There's
no capital punishment for that. They say
ta'zirat.
Some discretionary punishment.
But this is also with apostasy, which we
just discussed now.
Um
and obviously things
simple things that people don't know
like
people don't realize that we're talking
about Islamic governance and that we're
talking about the fact that if there was
an Islamic state and
even
cutting the hands if there's a state of
war, there's no such thing as Hudud.
Things like that, which I'm sure I can
I'm 100% sure you're aware of.
But it's those little nuances that can
um
I fear that if we don't introduce those
nuances and put those nuances, it just
seems like the evidentiary bar is way
less or that the
threshold is much less than
than it actually is and the nuances are
not there and that is you know, it kind
of
confirms some of the biases that these
individuals have. That's the only fear
fear I have. And also the fact that
these
murtaddin and whatever, they'll compile
your little sound bites and make it
sound like, "Khalas, this is this is
what Islam is for you, right? You know,
if you want a religion which
X Y Z." And it just creates a mental
image.
So, the approach where you're using a
bit of nuance and Islamic inquiry, I
think it's required. I do really I do
really believe it's required because
masha Allah, me and you, if you say to
me the the weirdest opinion or the
opinion that goes against the status quo
or whatever,
it's not going to shake me, it's not
going to shake you. I know that for a
fact. If I say to you, "You know, this
says this and this says that and X Y Z
and there's this opinion that says this
and you know, it's not going to it's not
going to faze you." But there are some
you found there that one thing like that
can actually
completely throw them off track. Now,
Jonathan Brown is attractive to those
people because he will he will speak in
a straightforward language.
But then
those people are going to be sometimes I
fear Jonathan Brown or the Al Muslim man
or whatever will be attracted to that.
But then they may feel that this person
is not being honest with me, right?
So, then
then they go to someone like yourself
and it's like complete from going from
here
to somewhere like where where where we
can both okay, we can employ we can all
both learn from each other in a sense.
Like, Yaqeen needs to learn from you.
Like,
not Yaqeen, but those
you know, don't come to me with approach
that we're not scared. We're not scared.
We're we're here to challenge, like you
said. So. Same time, there's more
nuance.
So, can can we say there's there's
something to be done by way of
um
approach nuancing the approach a little
bit more?
So, I think that nuance can sometimes be
used as a shield
uh blocking the actual core moral
problem that people have. The reason why
these Hudud or any aspect of the Sharia
Islam that people have a problem with.
The reason that they have a problem with
it is a deeper issue. They're operating
their worldview, their understanding of
right and wrong is based on a liberal
secular Western hegemonic philosophy.
That they don't put it in those terms,
but that's the reality. That's where
their doubts That's the source of their
doubts. Yeah. So, if you want to address
these doubts, it's not like you can
bring okay, this nuance with this
mas'ala, this nuance with this mas'ala
and you can
go day and night just addressing these
kinds of issues through nuance.
And and but the problem is you're not
addressing the core source. You will not
address the core source. So, you're not
providing a comprehensive solution.
And you mentioned yourself like the
person like on this these nuances of on
um
Ridda. So, you will mention Ibn Qayyim,
you'll mention others, but the majority
view is what it is. And then
furthermore, they will read the Hadith
that the Hadith based on where the
Prophet Muhammad
makes it very clear, "Whoever changes
his religion." So, that Hadith, okay,
that's what they will read and that the
moral problem there is how could
the best of creation, the final
messenger from Allah the Prophet
Muhammad
make such a statement? Say such a thing
that is so clearly contrary to
everything that I feel is the truth,
everything that I feel is moral.
That is the core source.
Yeah, so I I like that's what I like
about your approach. I like about your
approach that you do the roots of the
issue. It's
uh inqiyad issues and it's Islam issues.
The fact that you do actually believe
that this man was a prophet. This is the
question. Do you believe that his what
he came with was the haqq from the Alim?
And that's that's one thing that, you
know, I think that you do really well.
Another thing I want to speak to you
about, which I think I picked up a lot
from in terms of that debate you had
with Rizwan.
Well, let me finish my point before we
move on to another point. So, by giving
these nuances, I agree completely with
you that we have to have a nuanced
discussion and be nuanced about how we
represent our scholarly tradition. Yeah.
But we have to also not postpone the
problem. Let's not postpone the
discussion. The
fundamental issue is or even with the
issue of slavery, for example. Uh you
can give all these kinds of nuances
about the history of slavery and what is
the treatment of slaves in Islam.
But all the person who has a problem
with slavery needs to know
is that the Prophet Muhammad
owned slaves.
Even if he owned them for 1 day, even if
he owned them for 1 hour.
That is a considered a major moral
failing in according to the modern mind.
Right? So, you have to be able to
address that with directly. You have to
address the issue of slavery directly.
So, I mean, from what I've seen
I like about someone like, to be fair,
to Jonathan Brown's approach is that he
he he will tell you like what what is
slavery defined as. And he will he like
in the beginning of his book, he will
tell you this is
the definition of slavery. You have this
guy I think you mentioned this as well
actually. You mentioned this the same
kind of thing
in the your debate. You mentioned that
you know, you've got
this kind of slave Is this referred to
as slavery now? Is this kind of labor
referred to as slavery? Is prostitution
referred to it? Are human trafficking Is
that slavery? So So unpacking what the
concepts mean, right? In a sense.
And that explanation that you gave
uh which actually funny enough the
apostate agreed with you on one of the
the point where he agreed with me. He
said that I think it was historically
justified. Even though in another video
he said it's not historically just I
think Farid had a
a good video on this. He says it's not
historically justified in another video
and then he said it is historically or
something to that effect.
Um
that I believe you me I swear it has
such an impact because it rationalizes
it for them. Like
when you were doing that I just saw him
kind of sink into his chair thinking
what the hell did I get myself into?
It's like it's quicksand thinking this
guy I have no response for.
And to the extent we had to agree. I
mean on this point of slavery yeah he
thought the only way I would have got
out of this is agreement. You know.
So so so it's it's that discussion there
that what do we mean by the terms? Let's
unpack this slavery you know this that
the other.
And also the fact I mean there's one
thing one nuance I think that you might
have added to
the discussion with Ridwan is that when
you were saying that um
um
if if this happened now, right? Tanzilam
because I think it's very important to
differentiate between ta'tilam tanzilam
ta'tilam obviously the hukm at the the
the the the the
the um
the ruling what is the ruling and then
how it's implemented tanzil.
One thing I would have put in terms of
nuance because I've had discussions with
many scholars about this question.
Uh the question being if there was an
Islamic state again today
would they do
uh would they take
basically slave or slaves? And And there
from genuinely seems like there's two
opinions. It genuinely seems like
there's two opinions on this. One
opinion is that yes because of the
injunctions that and the other one seems
as if it's not something that is out
there and the Sharia came to
uh slowly do away with it then it's not
something you'd like to re- introduce.
But once again that nuance there could
make all the difference to someone who's
thinking
okay well Islam only operates in one
way. So I think that uh so long as it's
within the tradition and there's this
calumny and and there's actually based
on nas it's based on some kind of
evidence and scholars are talking about
it. I mean my job is not to give you the
rajih what is this the opinion the
bathil
the job of the mujtahid
the person who's able to reach such
conclusion and that will be his opinion
or her opinion. But for me my job is
just to present what the ikhtilaf is so
long as within the bounds of Sharia.
Okay this is what the Hanafi's have said
this is what the Shafi'is have said this
and I have to have some awareness of
that.
And sometimes doing that
from my experience I genuinely feel like
it can save someone's iman. I know it's
a sad state of affairs and I agree with
you it's not tackling the root of the
problem.
But sometimes we need to deal with
something put some kind of bandage on
the bleeding wound quickly before we do
the surgical operation if that makes
sense because if we if we just do it
leave leave it to bleed out it it would
literally bleed out to the point where
the person dies and then the iman in
this analogy is lost. So I just fear
that I fear that a little bit that if
we're too cutthroat with people and not
giving them those nuances which are
within the tradition that they will
eventually leave the deen and obviously
there's lots of
athar and aqwal of the Prophet and the
Sahaba about this
about this aqwal of the Prophet speak to
people
on their level and you would you like
them Prophet
would you like them to leave the
religion? And so
being careful here not to say something
which could trigger a
a theological emotional response which
for for someone who's ya
already on the edge which could mean
that they would leave the deen. I I fear
that. So even though I might yani
believe that this is the actual
punishment for this or this is the
actual punishment for that it's not for
me to kind of say okay this is one
thing. I say look this is
a spectrum of opinions X Y Z that exists
within a thousand hundred years. All of
them have backing of the scholars the
classical scholars before liberalism
even existed yani before liberalism was
even a thing. This this was the
conversations that were being had. So
what happens what happens on those
issues where there is no ikhtilaf
and there is no nuance? In that case
it's mass so that's part of the deen
isn't it? So if they're on the edge okay
so if they're on the edge and one more
word is going to throw them off the edge
then what's going to happen
if your approach is just
going to the ikhtilaf going to the
nuance
then on those issues
Yeah. Now I I think it's like my
approach is not just that. I I think
that what you said is right. I think you
have to deal with the the root of the
issue. So we always say like deal with
the root which is belief in God belief
in the Prophet. You know we we call it
the go route. We have a something called
the go route. Um
and I know which is you know God oneness
revelation and the prophets. So this
this is the what we call the root the
root. If someone does if if someone
doesn't believe in God or the oneness of
God or hasn't got yaqin in that
not to use the term in there.
Uh or the revelation or why is the Quran
from Allah subhana wa ta'ala and the
prophets?
Um if they don't have that as something
which is established then it can then
there's going to be issues. So we
obviously deal with that. But when
someone has a persisting
doubt that they just can't overcome
and there's khilaf on the mas'ala I
won't give them only one opinion.
So you're are you talking about a
one-on-one conversation? Because I agree
in a one-on-one conversation you have to
be very careful uh how you speak what
you say what are you presenting. But we
can't take that one-on-one context and
mass produce it because if we mass
produce it it's going to create all
these problems that you're speaking of
in terms of lack of confidence shubuhat
just being confused on very basic issues
within the deen.
When we I I think that there needs to be
a systematic approach and a systematic
project that we are presenting on these
kinds of issues that go to the root. And
there'll be nuances in that as well but
it has to keep in mind that the
conversation that you have on a
one-on-one individual basis you can't
mass produce it right? For example if I
talk to you about the issue of um LGBT
again
in a one-on-one conversation that might
have with someone this uh brother maybe
he is suffering from these
lusts for other men and he has fallen
into the sin and I'm not going to go and
the first thing I say to him is that
okay there's a hat for this or there is
ta'zir or what what it may be.
No I'll have a different approach where
I'm trying to understand his state of
iman and then work on the fundamentals
and then have the kind of gradual uh
in that one-on-one context. But I don't
take that and this is what I teach from
the mimbar. This is what I teach to
Muslim masses that they're not on the
brink of apostasy they're not falling
into major sins they're just the average
Muslim community that needs to know
about the higher ideals and principles
of the deen.
So I teach we'll teach them on that
level. Otherwise if I appeal to the
lowest common denominator based on my
one-on-one interactions then I'm
lowering the discord the discourse the
discussion I'm lowering the level of
knowledge
uh for the rest of the community. This
is a huge harm that would be caused.
I see the I see the point you're making
and I and I think there's a lot of truth
in that. I think you just have to pitch
it in such a way
is that and this is the I think the
difficulty
that it doesn't compromise the religion
at all. So you're not forced to do
tawriya and you're not forced to be
because that's the worst I think that's
the most ugly thing of it to be honest.
When when it seems like you're being
pressured and you're being weakened by
the enemy. I think we both agree on
this. I just felt feel sick even
thinking about having to uh to change
yani fundamentals because the enemy is
telling me or the
dominant culture is telling me that you
know
this is something unacceptable to us so
I have to I have to appease them or make
them happy. That's out of the question.
But at the same time the other side of
it which is
cutthroat approach this is you know this
is one-liners the one-liners on issues
which could potentially for let's say
even if it's 5% or 10% of the Muslim
population cause serious doubt.
I would say that's a dangerous approach
as well from from um you know doubt
perspective.
Uh and so just I I I would definitely
prefer that approach. I mean I would
definitely agree with that yani over
over that one all day long. But still
coming to the middle a little bit and
introducing a little bit more nuance
uh not giving those soundbites because
they just want those soundbites.
And to be honest
you know having those soundbites for
someone who
um
is not going to watch for example a four
and a half hour debate.
Those soundbites will be effective
enough to put someone off completely.
You know of your dawah for example,
right? So those soundbites might be and
it's not what you mean cuz you you had a
clarification aspect of it. But those
little soundbites I try to keep every
single sentence watertight so there's no
soundbite that can be taken out. There's
basically no one-line you can just take
out.
Yeah it's
I think that And you have a recent
experience with this?
With I have certain Christians using
certain sound bites.
They take that. They take that.
you, but someone else. No, they do it
with me as well. Oh, yes. Of
with Yasser Qadhi. Yeah. So, I think
that that's that's another issue as
well, you know, which we had to uh
kind of talk about because
especially nowadays we're dealing with
the enemy, you know, we're dealing with
people that are just looking for any
reason or any way
I
unfortunately truth is PR is a very
strong thing, right? Marketing. If you
market someone as an extremist or this
this is like a peculiar
We do have to try and limit that to some
extent. I remember reading one uh one
bab of uh
uh
Sahih al-Bukhari
which is I cannot remember the exact
phrasing, but something like Adam
al-Khawarij
something like this. Which is that you
don't want to kill the Khawarij who at
the time were the renegades or I don't
know how they're
Karaite.
Those individuals not killing them
in order to create ta'alluf unity or
something like that, but also that the
enemy as the hadith says does not
um
say that Muhammad kills his friends.
Right? So, so Prophet Muhammad was
clearly uh
uh yani concerned of the PR aspect of of
the deen because he knows that people
can be put off the whole religion if it
because imagery is more powerful than
arguments.
Like and I think you realize that when
you're doing your at one point you were
talking about something like um
like you're caricaturing the the West
saying that you know, you got this and
then the person dies at home
in the in the in the old folks home. I I
can't remember what but I like the way
you put it because it's probably not
even a caricature. It's probably the the
case for about 30 or 40% of the
population. That's what happens to
a lot of people in the West. But when
you were doing that, that image sticks
in they'll forget everything you say.
Maybe all the arguments you make, but
that image they'll go to sleep that
night and think of themselves when
they're 75 years old in an old folks
home dying and no one knows
as you said, no one knows where they
are, who they are. That image is
powerful. But the image also of the
barbarian Muslim orientalist type images
and stuff like that. That's also a very
powerful image. And it's sometimes it's
like an ugly smell. You don't want to be
near it, you know. Um and so having that
connected to Islam is also a problem in
my head.
So, it's all about it's all about trying
our best. I know it's difficult, but um
that's the only thing I would recommend.
Because what I think you should do is my
recommendation is to start doing formal
debates.
And you've had your fun with this
unworthy opponent.
This unworthy opponent this aspiring
partner
uh
who who doesn't have any qualifications
or training, but I genuinely feel like
because you have Harvard education,
because you you know, you postgraduate
level, you've done the Islamic training.
You know,
the next step for you should be formal
debate. Have you considered that
yourself doing like formal debates, you
know, on the stage doing these kinds of
things?
Yeah, I definitely considered it. The
thing about the US is that it's not the
um
it's not really popular in the US. Oh,
really?
Uh
we're not as manly mashallah as in the
UK. So, Well, you can always go to the
UK. You can do it here. Don't worry.
We'll
book something for you.
Barakallah feekum. But yeah, it's a
cultural difference in the US. This is
not like it's not the only debate that's
in the public consciousness. Generally
is like a presidential debate uh for
presidential candidates, but other than
that it's kind of seen it's even frowned
upon. Like, well, why do you need to
debate? Let's just have a friend
friendly
conversation and that's So, this kind of
confrontational or oppositional even
just oppositional is kind of frowned
upon in in here. So, I haven't been able
to get so many debates actually, but I
agree with your advice and I'm not
trying to say that I have the my
approach can't be improved. So, I
appreciate your naseeha and I really
appreciate what you are advising to
bring Yeah, no. I'm
I'm only saying it because I think that
you are one of the intellectuals of the
Muslim world that can cause
the most if you like intellectual damage
to the opponents. And going forward
I think you know what you're doing. I I
don't you don't need me. I'm only
telling you from my experience with with
what I YouTube and social media what
people are going to do like on a
marketing level PR level. This is what
they're going to do. They're going to
try and distort you as a character.
They're going to try and he really he
was a
They're going to try and do ad hominems.
They're going to lie about you.
They'll they'll do that anyway, right?
If they're going to do that anyway, then
why should I uh
you know, censor myself?
do it anyway, but just
give them less to chew on basically.
Okay, that's a fair point, but let me
give you a
small counterpoint. Just small. Uh you
know about how the Kuffar came to one of
the Sahaba and men and were mocking and
ridiculing and saying, "Look at this
religion that even uh you're
being taught how to uh wash yourself."
Yeah, Salman al-Farsi
exactly Salman al-Farsi.
Uh and they were using this as ridicule
and mockery. And what did Salman
al-Farsi say to that? He said, "Yes."
You know, he was very upfront. He said,
"Yes, our deen does teach this." And
this is how and he went and proceeded to
explain. So, I think there is a value in
certain circumstances because they will
they want to challenge you and they want
to they're waiting for you to start
waffling
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. And they
want to put you on the back foot because
they want you to continue to not say it.
Don't say it, right? So, this is a kind
of a bullying tactic. And sometimes for
the bully, someone like Ridwan
like this Murtaza, you just have to say,
"Yes. Yes, that is true. Whatever."
Yeah, when you did that it completely To
be honest, it neutralized it. Disarmed
him. Like you could see his the the
deflation in in his Now, you you
finished him. There's no doubt about
that. Like, you know, he he was out of
his depth. He had no idea what he was
doing.
He was deflated. He was psychologically
disturbed. He had a panic attack
afterwards. He was sickened by his
performance. He was disappointed to the
core. He had no business being in the
same conversation as you in that
capacity. Only he should have said the
only thing he should have been honest
about is saying, "You know, I'm your
student." You know, I'm here to learn
from you. That's wallahi how it should
have been. Someone on that level you
should have come and say, "Look, I'm I'm
here to learn." If you came at that
humble level, then maybe he would have
spared himself the uh
humiliation which I'm I'm sure is
encroaching his every thought every
might actually he's probably eating food
now and thinking about oh damn, you
know, this and that and with his wife
and driving in the street and having a
panic attack red light or how how
he's thinking. Now, I I believe believe
me you've you've really damaged his
confidence. I can see it. You know, and
I and I called him to Islam. You know,
I'm I know he's listening to this. You
know, we we both call you to Islam, I'm
sure.
Come to the haqq. You've been all of
your your arguments your main arguments
have fallen straight on their face and
you've
you had it all explained to you in very
uh
academic terms which are not just
referencing the tradition itself, but
things outside. So, I I I think with
Ridwan there's no there's no discussion
there. Even his
a munsif a fair person from his own
supporters will say, "This guy was
destroyed. This guy actually has no
business debating." You know, and I I do
think people are going to let lose
interest in him now. Because when a
fighter gets knocked out, you know,
people don't want to see him fight
again. Even his own I see on
Twitter and stuff like that. It's you
know, just leave it, you know. Don't
debate these guys. You know, I I see his
own fans kind of like putting him off.
Just stick to the kind of content videos
that you're doing where you have no
challenge immediate challenge. So, that
way I I think you basically finished
him.
You've practically finished him.
But um
Yeah, I don't know. I went on this long
rant about him. But um
despite this what I was going to say now
is what I found really really
interesting in that discussion and I I
learned so much. I actually took notes
on as well.
And I and I like this. Is your
concentration on the family. About the
stable family.
It's something which we don't really do
as much in the dawah here. And it's
something which I thought was a gaping
hole in what we what we do and say.
In terms of the family now, the argument
that you were making is that Islam
basically prioritizes the health and
functionality of the the nuclear family
if you want to call it that, but the the
the family unit. And anything that is
counter to that to that is something
which Islam rejects. So, which is why a
lot of the homosexual acts that we
talked about this and that all of those
hudud uh that he has a problem with
makes more sense when you see it through
that prism from that paradigm that the
the the centrality of the family the
stability of the family.
What research did you come across and
have you seen which uh sticks out to you
in this regard in terms of the family
unit and the priority and happiness as
this really key aspect of how having a
stable and united family connects with
human happiness?
So, there are different angles to
approach it. You can take a historical
approach. You can take an
anthropological approach. You can take a
psychological approach. This is really
interdisciplinary because as uh people
are finding out within academia
non-Muslims
is that the liberal idea of happiness
that we just need to maximize personal
autonomy, personal choice, personal
freedom as an individual that this is
really the key to happiness and utopia.
This is a lie. This is a complete lie
and a myth and it shows in every aspect
of their research. So, if you look at
historically, why is it the fact that so
many societies historically had this
kind of model where family, the extended
family, or you know, the kinship unit,
this is the
this is the building block of their
societies. Why is this the case? Why
when we look at supposedly the
evolutionary, even the hardcore atheist
evolutionists, they're looking at why is
this evolutionarily adaptive? Why is
this
being selected for in the Darwinian
terms? The these family structures that
we find even amongst chimps that are
supposedly   our closest
common ancestor,
they have this same kind of family unit.
They have patriarchy, they have uh
polygamy, they have all of these kinds
of things. Why? If you're an
evolutionist, then you believe that this
is selected because it is the best in
material terms
for your species.
So, then the liberal has a challenge
here that you want to accept this
atheistic evolution on the one hand, but
it is speaking completely against your
political philosophy, your moral
philosophy that you're preaching on the
other hand. This is a very easy conflict
to exploit. And then when we look at the
psychological literature, um same story.
What is actually leading to people's
happiness uh in in in purely material
terms because they don't have this idea
of the afterlife and they don't know the
full depth of the soul and what is
actually going to bring peace to the
soul uh in terms of love of Allah and
Ridwan of Allah, but they recognize that
there's a big component
of happiness that comes through this
this family unit. I mean, not only
family, another big component is
community.
Uh having a in-group is the technical
term that they use, the in-group, that
humans naturally they want to associate
with those who are similar to them.
Unfortunately, because of the loss of
faith, you have people that are aligning
on the basis of uh
culture or nationality,
this kind of patriotism, or they're
aligning with uh even football teams.
You know, they're they're forming groups
and they they are deriving happiness and
pleasure from being part of a group.
And men especially feel this, that you
have the feeling of uh being a part of a
group and willing to fight with your
brothers for your cause, being able to
sacrifice for your group.
Uh even your own self, sacrificing your
own self for your group. This is a major
source of
contentment and sense of purpose and
happiness that human beings
feel, but it's contrary to individual
happiness, like individual autonomy,
that oh no, me first, forget about the
group. Me first, forget about the
community. Me first, forget about the
family. This is contrary to
individualism, but the psychological
studies are showing that uh
Do you have any in mind, like the ones
that the the top studies that you've
you've read that show this?
It's I mean, it's there's so many. It's
not just one. Just a Google search
in-group versus out-group. In-group
versus out-group. Um
but the point being that what do we have
in Islam? We have al-wala' wal-bara',
don't we? We have this kind of sentiment
in inscribed in our deen.
That yeah, as believers, we have to have
a ummah first mentality, that we care
about each other, we're sacrificing for
each other, we're working. That is a
huge source of
societal stability, peace of mind,
psychological
happiness, and all of these kinds of
benefits from the concept of al-wala'
wal-bara'.
Yet we we see this deemphasized,
unfortunately, by some modernists,
correct? So, many different when we look
at this literature,
and I'm telling you it's not just one or
two papers. There are many. Uh and
inshallah, you know, I'm bringing some
of this uh
onto my website and social media, but
the point is that we can appeal to their
own sources, okay? It's not
contradictory for us, okay? They're the
ones that claim they want science and
they want research. Okay, khalas. You
want science and research? Then your own
books are saying this. Your own books.
We know it's the truth. We know it's
haqq because it's coming from Allah and
his messenger sallallahu alaihi
wasallam. That's all we need to know.
But you are not convinced. You
murtaadeen or modernists or non-Muslims,
you're not convinced. Your own books are
showing you the truth of Islam.
I found quite interesting as a corollary
to this discussion, um
uh the subsequent discussion you had
with
the mufti on um
polygamy as well. And you and you
referenced hypergamy and uh
and you know how
psychologically how some women may be uh
would would prefer to be in these kind
of relationships. What kind of research
did you uh
What kind of research did you come
across with that?
Akhi akhi, my wife is going to watch
this. Please.
Brother, we need it for the da'wah.
Yeah.
No, I
only textual research. I think Well,
that's textual as the Quran
Subhanallah. So, yeah, this is uh
I mean, I think polygamy is also one of
the clear signs of the that this is from
Allah. This deen is from Allah.
That
you know, there are when we have
polygynous societies
my dad always used to say that as well.
How many wives did he have?
No, no, to be honest, he actually was
monogamous from the beginning of his
life. I think he was only polygamous
once or something like that.
He kept saying this.
How can you be polygamous once?
Oh, no, no, no, he had two wives at one
time and then he divorced one.
Oh, okay, okay. Okay. So, then he was
practicing it. That's what that was my
question.
one wife. Masha Allah, masha Allah.
Yeah, my own my grandfather had two
wives
at the same time. So, he had and he had
20 children.
So, that's how they were practicing it
in the previous generation.
But yeah, I mean, this is something that
uh many women themselves, like if you
claim if to be a feminist and you want
to maximize women's choice, then we can
even concede that point and say, "Fine,
you want to maximize choice?" Then some
women prefer to be a second or third
wife. Uh it's a source of social
mobility. You're coming from a poorer
background or a less well-to-do
background and you want to move up, your
family wants to move up and be connected
to stronger, more wealthy family, then
you do it. It's
Now you're
Now you're Now you're using all the
justifications, right?
I'm all about women, you know? I'm very
pro-woman.
You do really follow them, eh?
I have to look out. People say that, you
know, this is not Islam is not
misogynistic. It's pro-woman.
Mm. Every in every aspect.
Well, obviously the feminist would argue
that, you know, if it's happening for
men, then it should happen for women. It
should be equal, right?
No, the women actually wouldn't want to
be
No, no, the woman actually looks down on
a man who is going to be a essentially
cuckolded.
Where she is the matriarch and there are
several men that are, you know, uh equal
as in status as her spouse. This is
actually disgusting. It's disgusting Is
there any Is there any psychological
evidence for that claim?
Yeah, there are. There's plenty of
psychological evidence for this and
evolutionary evidence and all of these
kinds of non-Muslim sources and science
can be brought to bear. But when we look
throughout human history,
the majority of societies were
polygamous. And that means that
polygamous means only maybe three or to
5% of the men are actually practicing
polygamy. Most men are monogamous, even
in polygamous societies, even in the
Muslim community, we know. Uh maybe not
your family, but for the most most
families are monogamous. But why is it
the case? Why in every society,
separated by geographic region and time,
are the majority
polygamous? Explain this. Explain They
should explain why this is the case.
Well, what if the majority polygynous
cuz they can come counter argument to
say, "Well, hold on. In India, you have
these kind of uh women that have
multiple sexual partners." And
you can find counter evidence.
It's very
Those kinds of societies are extremely
rare.
They're extremely They exist. I
acknowledge that there are some uh
societies that are matriarchal, but
you'll notice that they're very small
groups
and they're always on the brink of
extinction.
They're always on the brink of
extinction and being dominated by other
groups. It's because it's it's very
contrary to the interest of your group
and the the existence of your group to
have a matriarchy. Patriarchy is much
more stable. It's much more safe. This
is what allows a flourishing
civilization.
And all of the most powerful
civilizations have been polygamous in
his in history. And it's only this
modern Western uh civilization that is
monogamous, but it's also suffering from
all kinds of diseases and problems and
it's on its way to collapse.
But I mean this is many arguments that
you can bring to defend the morality and
the wisdom of polygamy.
And another thing I found quite
interesting in the discussion was
your your discourse on flogging.
And you actually I I was not aware of
this book in defense of flogging. That
you that you mentioned.
What's the guy called? Peter Moslow, is
that his name? Moskos. Mosko, yeah.
I was really not aware of it.
What's the gist of the argument with
with flogging? Obviously it's just for
the for for the end user who might not
understand what we're talking about was
talking about whipping. But also we're
not talking about something which is
we're going to implement it.
Because people think that we're okay.
These people are we just talk about
polygamy.
And now they're talking about things. So
you know, put them together. We're not
talking about anything we're planning on
doing on a physical level. These are
just abstract
classical discussions. No, no, no, we
are. I mean maybe not you, but I
in the ideal sense in the ideal sense if
we were had any authority, which we
don't. We had any authority. Yeah, we
would do we would implement these of
course. Yeah, I mean I meant
governmental authority. Governmental
authority is different to Oh, I thought
you meant like go
going outside right now.
People think this. People think that.
People think that one of the
misconceptions for example we're talking
about apostasy.
They think that you actually got to you
know, implement that you're going to be
judge, jury, and
executioner. So anyways, just a caveat,
but um
that what what what is the argument
there in terms of the flogging argument
that you were making? I think you were
cut off a few times, so I wanted to kind
of give you a chance to expand that.
So the author his book in defense of
flogging, he starts with a very simple
question.
Is it really barbaric to induce corporal
punishment? Is it what what makes it
barbaric or what makes it immoral?
And if we just reflect on it for a few
moments,
we realize that there's not no real
rational reason why actually inducing
corporal punishment is more of a harm or
is more brutal or barbaric than caging
someone, locking them up for a portion
of their lives. In fact, if you gave
people the choice between a momentary
physical pain through a whip
versus being locked up for years of
their life,
most people would actually choose
Separated from their family, separated
from their children, separated from
everything they From their life, yeah.
Their entire life is going to be
derailed. And separating from their
family and all of this harm that comes,
that seems much more brutal and
torturous.
So that's it's a simple argument, but
then he elaborates and shows that
corporal punishment was
part of Western culture.
But in the 20th century, I mean the it
was completely banned within the 20th
century.
But the beginnings of this opposition to
corporal punishment is from the
enlightenment. So from the 19th century
basically philosophers who on the basis
of their own musings and their own
philosophy, atheistic philosophies, they
decided that this is barbaric and we
shouldn't
punish, rather we should rehabilitate or
reform. But you can't rehabilitate and
reform someone without holding them
against their will and caging them
against their will. So really what is
the what is more or less barbaric or
brutal about that. In fact, it's more
brutal.
So his he gives a historical analysis
and says that we should actually bring
back
flogging. This should be a option, a
penal punishment instead of stuffing
people into prisons
and cages and ruining their lives,
giving this them this label of being
convicts.
Rather
they taste the whip for the punishment.
And actually it's more of a deterrent
when there's a physical
pain to something, it is very effective
at deterring future crime or future
misbehavior.
Especially if it's done in the community
setting where people can see what
Of course. And that's exactly what I
remember Emile Durkheim was talking
about in his discourse on deterrence.
And punishment. I think this is one of
the guiding
rationale he had in terms of that.
But what if you had to summarize the
differences, I mean
it seemed from the discussion that you
were saying that basically Islamic
punitive law system the evidentiary bar
is very high, but the punishment is also
very high as well. So both of those
things are high
at the same time. Whereas in in many
Western states, the evidentiary bar is
much lower. So an accusation can can get
you in serious trouble, even just a mere
accusation.
And the punishment is lower than the
Islamic punishment in many cases, but
still quite high compared to where the
evidentiary bar is.
Um
this being one thing that I thought
about as a general difference between
like maybe a liberal government
punitive system. What other main
differences are there in terms of people
who won't understand? And why do those
differences exist? I mean why is it that
these punishments which now seem like a
caricature or seem like a orientalist um
trope, why are those things
rejected so vehemently by the liberal
mind? And how can we bring people that
are secularists and liberal a bit closer
to understanding the rationale behind
the punishments generally speaking.
Well, the liberal mind has a problem
with all punishment because the liberal
mind is utilitarian.
Utilitarian meaning utilitarianism
meaning they want to maximize overall
pleasure and for the most number of
people and reduce
Greatest good for the greatest number.
Like like greatest good for the greatest
number. So punishment inherently is
counter utilitarian. Punishment is
counter to the logic. Why? Because the
crime has been committed, the harm has
been committed. If you punish the
person, you're going to cause more harm.
You're going to add to the total sum of
harm because the crime is not going to
be resolved. Like the harm that was
caused is not going to go away just
because you punished a person. So is
there a way to
rehabilitate
so that you're not causing harm, you're
not increasing the level of pain in
society, but you get the benefit of
deterrence or reducing crime. The
problem is that this is fundamentally
incoherent for what I said the reason I
mentioned before is that you're putting
someone against their will into a cage
and derailing their entire life. That is
a serious
harm, that's a serious pain that's
caused.
And there I think there's a place for
imprisonment and that's found in the
Sharia and sometimes for tazir
punishments the qadi might say, "Okay,
you have to be imprisoned." Nothing
wrong with that, but the point is
against contrary to the liberal,
contrary to the utilitarian, there is
still a great amount of harm caused and
in fact the punishment from the whip is
going to be less severe and more
effective. It's going to be less
damaging to the individual and more
effective in deterring their misbehavior
than just pure
prison punishment.
But this is a kind of argument that the
liberal enlightenment thinker could not
anticipate. Okay? Because he is using
his
logic or what he thinks is his logic and
he's think reflecting on this and coming
up with his philosophy.
But when the actual data is compiled
using millions of data points and the
reality is seen, we find that the wisdom
of Islam shines through. The wisdom of
the Sharia shines very clearly. So where
is that from? Did the prophet
if he was a false prophet as they claim
and he is just making this religion up,
how did he know? How did he know that
this is a much more effective punishment
than mass imprisonment or rehabilitation
or all of this enlightenment nonsense?
How did he know that? No, he didn't know
it. It was revealed from the creator of
human beings who who has all knowledge
and knows what is going to be more
effective, what is going to be more
beneficial, what is going to be So this
is clear signs in the even the the thing
that they are attacking us for, hudud
and punishment, even in those things the
clear evidence and sign of the
superiority of Islam is found.
It's actually a pleasure and it's been a
pleasure having you on this podcast.
Before we end, I just wanted to ask you
to inform some of the listeners about
some of the
courses that you do, some of the
blogs that you have or some of the
articles that you've posted. Where can
we find these things? And you've got a
YouTube channel as well. What's what's
that called and how can someone access
more of your material?
Yes, they can just search my last name
Haqqani Ali. And that was going to be
very difficult.
Spelling it is very difficult.
But they can look at muslimskeptic.com
spelled with a K, the American way,
muslimskeptic.com.
I also have an institute where I teach a
lot of material on these subjects, Al
Ethna .org. Al Ethna Institute, Al Ethna
it comes from Al Ethna Al Haq. Are we
not on the truth? It's the same name of
Omar
when he became Muslim.
So we want to invite that kind of
attitude of are we not on the truth?
This is we are on the Haq and we have to
be confident, we speak with confidence.
And we show when we invite the world to
Islam for their own benefit and for the
benefit of all of humanity. So Al-Isra
Institute muslimskeptic.com
and then the YouTube channel is Muslim
Skeptic The Muslim Skeptic it's on
YouTube inshallah.
Well, Jazakallah it's been a pleasure
having you on and I'm sure many of us
have benefited all of us have benefited
including me and if you're going to be
probably called to the show again.
Jazakallah
for the time being brothers and sisters
you can go to the links and to the
websites that he's provided. Jazakallah.
Barakallahu feekum.